Hello again. In this video, we are going to make some final remarks about mutexes before we finish
off this section and go on to the next part of the course.
These are mainly tips on how to use
mutexes effectively. The first tip is, do not look a mutex for any longer than you need to.
If you are using a mutex to protect a shared resource, when a thread has a lock on that mutex every other
thread that needs to access the resource will have to stop and wait, which means all those threads
are going to take longer to execute.
And the program as a whole is going to take longer to execute.
If we lock for longer than we need to, for example, in the lock guard example where we kept a lock while
we were sleeping, then that is going to slow down the program.
We should also avoid doing input/output operations while holding a lock, as these are very slow.
And yes, I know that we did do input/output while holding a lock, but those were just to demonstrate
things.
You would not write those in a real program.
The typical pattern for using a mutex with a resource is that we lock the mutex just before we access
the resource and unlock it immediately afterwards, before we do any processing.
For example, if we are reading data from a file, we lock the mutex, read the data,
then we unlock the mutex and then we start processing the data that we just read.
If we need to access the file later on, if we need to save something to it, for example, then we
would lock it again.
So by doing that, we give other threads, more opportunities to run.
When working with shared data, it is often useful to make our own private copy of the data and then we can
do the processing on that private copy without
a lock.
And again, if we needed to update the shared version of the data, then we just acquire another lock on it.
When we have complex data structures or compound variables, how many of the elements do we lock?
And the answer, which I hope should be common sense, is that we do not look any more elements than
we need to.
As an example, if you are writing a linked list implementation, it is not a good idea to have a single
lock which covers every access to the list.
For example, if you want to access the first element, then you have to put a lock on it, which excludes
every other thread. Even if you have a thread which wants to access a completely unrelated element,
that thread would be locked out.
So it is better to have locks which are specific to a particular element or group of elements.
On the other hand, if you have one lock per element, then that can be too fine-grained.
If you consider removing a node from a linked list, that will affect the nodes before and after
that node because their pointers need to be updated.
If you just have a lock which applies only to that node, then there is a race condition, because other threads
could interrupt and modify those surrounding nodes.
So in that case, you would need to have a lock, which also covers the surrounding nodes and it needs
to acquire those locks in a single operation.
In fact, writing a thread-safe linked list is surprisingly difficult.
And certainly not something we are going to cover in this course.
So what are the advantages and disadvantages of mutexes?
Well, mutexes allow us to prevent race conditions when we are using shared resources and they are
fairly straightforward, provided you take a little care.
Locking and unlocking mutexes are very slow operations because they require help from the operating
system.
Mutexes are rather a low level concept. They place a lot of reliance on the programmer to remember to
use a mutex. The programmer must remember to use the right mutex.
If we have our linked list, we have different mutexes for different groups of elements.
And it is quite easy to go wrong.
And the programmer must be able to understand how all these different mutexes work and how different
threads can modify the data.
And that takes quite a lot of mental bandwidth.
For that reason, most real world programs do not use mutexes directly; they use higher level structures.
And finally, to avoid some of the problems with using mutexes with shared data or resources, do not
use global data and global functions, use classes.
You would make the shared data or the handle to the shared resource a member of the class.
You would also make the mutex a member of the class.
You make the task function, a member function.
And then you provide a getter function, so it is possible to retrieve the shared data even when there
are not any threads running.
OK, so that's it for this video and this section, next time we will go on to something else.
But in the meantime, keep coding!